Great. You're listening to radio,
the podcast from New York public radio, public radio,
W Y C N N P hey I'm Jad Abumrad,
and I'm Robert Krulwich. This is radio lab, the podcast,
and let me just throw something out here that to set up what is going to be an
awesome podcast, New Year's resolutions. Okay. Yes.
Now I know that's a few months out of date, but that's exactly my point by now.
Most of us are the same old schmucks that we were last year.
We've completely forgotten about all the promises we made to ourselves.
We've slipped back into old patterns and what you're doing. Out of curiosity,
I didn't make any, so I don't have any problem with it at all,
but how do I make them? In previous years I did.
I would have long since failed long since failed. Now,
do you ever wonder why with things like New Year's resolutions which require
willpower, why none of us are any good or I'm not sure. None of us.
I know people.
I'm married to a person who seems to be able to make a resolution in fiercely in
determine, at least stick to. We'll see it. There you go. See,
some of us can do it. Some of us can't because I was born under a dark star.
There you go. There you go. It's the real question is,
are some of us just doomed because we were born under a dark start and not have
willpower? Others do have it or is it something that can be taught?
Do you ever wonder about that? Yeah. Hello. Test, test,
test, test, test. Yeah. So you're monitoring the sound. Well,
I want to introduce you to some light. His name is Walter Walter May shout.
He's a psychologist at Columbia University in the psychology department.
And if you've ever asked yourself questions about willpower and like what is it
exactly? How does it work if I don't have it, can I get it?
Well he has done a remark, global study, so we are ready to go.
And the marshmallow study, the marshmallows study at the start of the study.
How did you come up with the idea? Well,
I had three little girls who at that time, we're talking now, late sixties,
we're going from uh, being these uh, uh,
sweet sometimes and Yappy often, uh, you know, little creatures.
So we'll do there at that point. Well they, they ranged in age from two to five.
Uh, and what I was a,
what any parent immediately knows is that when kids start going into the fourth
year of life, a lot happens to them and he noticed them,
one of his daughters who had just hit four,
suddenly she could delay gratification. Almost all of a sudden he, if he,
if he told her, look, I know you want that. I don't know, pack a bubble gum,
but don't whine. Don't complain when we get home,
I'll give you something better. Suddenly she could wait.
This was in the late 1960s and there was almost no work on quote,
willpower or self control, self regulation. It just wasn't a topic.
So he thought he would jump in,
here's what he did to test this hypothesis that something happens to kids around
the age of four. He went to a nursery school,
being nursery school at Stamford University,
gathered up a bunch of kids at different ages and one by one he put them in a
real small room off the a play room. He'd bring the kids in,
sit them in a chair,
and then he would give them a choice which had to do with marshmallows. Yummy.
What kid doesn't love marshmallows? And he would say to them,
here's your choice. You can either have one, one marshmallow now or if you wait,
you can have too, too much Milos later. Uh,
now that creates a lot of dilemmas. Yeah, it does.
Especially because you know,
the researchers are leave the room to give the kids a chance to think.
And right there on the table in front of the child where the marshmallows
calling them. There are no distractions in the room. There are no pictures,
no toys, no, I have to sell. Okay. So it's basically some isolation check,
but pure agony. I can show you a video of what they're doing and you can see it.
Can we watch? Sure. Let's turn it on.
And he walked over to a TV and pulled up a video of the marshmallow experiment
and I must tell you it is some of the greatest video ever shot,
particularly because the round he showed us,
the researchers had replaced the marshmallows with something even more enticing
Oreo cookies, Oreos. So what you're seeing over here is a tortured looking,
adorable little girl wearing a blue sweatshirt bell, five years old,
pigtails kind of sniffing at it, puts her face right up to the cookie.
She's weighing do I want this badly? And actually what she's doing,
she picks up the cookie, puts it down, weighing and reevaluating her choice.
She knows she can have this one now, but if she wait, she can have more. But
she gives in after just a few minutes. Okay.
Now we have a sort of a doughy face boy and a yellow t-shirt who's kicking cause
he's so antsy, this kid strategies not to confront the cookie directly,
but to kick the table that holds the cookie, kick it, kick it, kick.
It's a very male response. I mean the remarkably,
he holds out way longer than the first girl.
And of course there were the cheaters.
Here we see a guy looking at the two cookies.
He's taken one, which is against the rules.
He's licking the inside is licking out the cream,
replacing the licked cookie and putting it back on the tray. Anyhow,
we watch kid after kid after kid being tortured by the gravitational pull of
Oreo cookies, some to avoid the bull went under the table,
some turn their backs and started singing a song. All in all,
Michelin is team tested,
500 kids and then initial study and they found that yes,
four year olds are dramatically better than younger kids at resisting
temptation. So something does happen at around four years old. But within that,
and here's where the plot thickens. There was a huge range.
Some kids gave up after a minute,
others could last 20 minutes and most fell somewhere in the middle where they
could resist the cookie for about seven minutes, eight minutes.
That's the average, all depending on age and what the goodies are and so on.
Now in and of itself, there's nothing too surprising here.
He basically confirmed his hypothesis. But what is amazing,
truly amazing is what happens next.
I just was sitting around the kitchen table and my kids, about five,
six years after the studies began,
he was talking with his kids and he knew that they still went to school.
This is now five or six years later with some of those kids from the initial
study. So he's asking them, you know, how is Jenny doing and how's a,
you know how Ashley doing this was just totally informal and it's good to tell
them, well sesame's doing fine, Jenny, not so good.
And he began to realize a weird pattern.
The kids like Tesla who he remembered had been good at waiting for the
marshmallow back in this study.
Well they seem to be the ones who were doing better.
They were doing better at school and suddenly on a very small and you know,
very small sample. It looked like there were differences here.
Could there be a relationship between the number of seconds,
these kids way when they were four and how they are doing when they're,
when they're 10 and 11 and 12 so what we did beginning when these kids were 15
years old, 14 to 17 years old, was the first followup
[inaudible].
So he tracked down as many of those original Cates as he could find.
Just for starters, he looked at their sat scores. Now keep in mind,
this is 10 years later and some stupid little tests that a kid takes when
they're four that has to do with resisting and marshmallow and how many seconds
they can resist, should not. I repeat,
not have anything to do with how they do on the sat scores,
which is one of the most important tests they're ever going to take.
But we found remarkable correlations between the actual sat scores and a seconds
of delay time. In other words,
the kids who waited the longest when they were four staring at the Oreos did
better on the sats than the kids who just gave up immediately. Yes.
How much better significant.
The differences are so big.
It's Jonah Lehrer science writer,
often a guest on the show who's also reporting about these followup studies.
Yeah.
The difference between a kid who can wait one minute for the marshmallow on a
kid who can wait 20 minutes is the difference. My sat scores is 210 points.
No Way.
Yeah. This isn't, you know, fiddling at the margins.
This is a profound difference.
Well above what one would expect by chance. And as they dug into the data,
it turned out it went way beyond sats.
The kids who waited back when they were four, now in their late teens,
parents reported they were better behaved.
And on the flip side,
the kids who hadn't been able to wait back in that initial study,
they were more likely now to be suspended from school,
to be classified as problem kids to be, you know,
the kind of kids who are most likely to wind up as the bullies.
[inaudible]
the results were so odd and strong admissions team decided to keep following
those kids up through their teeth into their twenties and thirties and beyond.
So this is now roughly 40 years because they're about 44 45 at this point.
We're still in touch with over 250 and they've expanded the kind of data that
they're keeping track of everything for how well they able to stick to goals at
work, how far they go in school, even their health, for example,
the body mass index,
a huge amount of data they really want to like amass a an FBI file,
so to speak,
and the more data they collect, the worse it gets.
The kids who could way back when they were four and now in their forties have
better jobs. They've gone farther in their education. They're even skinnier.
Yeah, and the kids who couldn't wait. Now think about this.
How much willpower you exhibit as a four year old in something so insignificant
as trying to resist the pull of a marshmallow could predict this frightening
amount about your life?
There's no question that that was something predictive about it and that it
wasn't a fluke. Here's what I'm wondering.
If I have a four year old and I informally give them this test and they fail,
should I be worried? Do you know what I mean? Yeah,
yeah. I mean, you know me, I've got such a bias against um,
these kind of rigid predictive variables when it comes to the brain.
But I think these experiments have to give you pause
cause one interpretation of Mitchell's work and it's one we unfortunately cannot
rule out is that maybe self control is hardwired the other habit by the age of
four or you don't. And if you don't have it, statistically you're screwed.
[inaudible]
there's another way to interpret this. Thankfully,
if willpower gets it, start when you're four, which is a big F,
let's just assume for the moment it does.
Then you've got to ask what exactly happens at age four that separates the
willful from the rest of us.
So what you're seeing over here is a tortured looking, adorable little girl,
Walter Mischel would say, go back to those videos and really look at them.
If you do, much of what you'll see has very little to do with nature.
She's looking at it. She's withdrawing from it and she's holding her breath.
The first thing you notice he says is that every kid is an agony.
Even the good kids, they are not models of strength.
They are suffering too cause Oreo cookies, man, they're good. Second,
the very simple difference between the good kids and the bad kids seems to be
that the good kids just found ways to distract themselves. They get strategies.
She's holding her breath at this girl saying to herself and stop shushing that
seemed to work or kicking it. Kicking table. That's actually a good strategy.
Says we're making up a tune. You know,
kids composing you song just turning around in the chair. Okay,
we're back to girl number one now she has her back completely turned to the
cookies. Some kids actually pretended the marshmallow was a cloud.
I mean the kinds of things one sees like strat or the cookie was a UFO.
They turned this hot stimulus into as Michelle puts at a cold stimulus and that
might be all that separated. The kids who could wait,
some the kids who caved the best kids and we had a better bag of tricks.
And if that's all we're talking about, tricks. Well you can teach a trick.
You know what I mean? One my favorite, yeah,
twist on his experiment that he did was he found that you could take kids who
had trouble delaying gratification.
So kids who had really had a tough time waiting for the marshmallow and you
simply say to them, put a picture frame around the marshmallow,
apprehensive picture and not a delicious piece of candy.
All of a sudden you gave kids this little trick and you could turn load two
layers into much higher delay or
oh, so he could help these kids.
Absolutely. You can teach just to, so that simple suggestion,
while do you just pretend to sit picture frame,
he's got these bar graphs and it's dramatic.
All of a sudden the load delay layers are performing just like behind the layers
really.
And is there any evidence that if you teach these kids these low de layers and
you give them these tools that you can spend their life in the right direction
in some way?
The, there's, there's no evidence of that yet. Um, you know,
he hasn't shown that simply teaching kids how to draw picture frame around a
marshmallow leads to a ballooning sat scores.
And that's where I think even initial admits that it remains unclear how
valuable districts are because you can teach obviously a kid a trick to deal
with the marshmallow in a lab setting,
but that doesn't mean they'll necessarily be able to go home and, and you know,
you can't go around drawing picture frames all day long,
but that's kind of the crux of it now. I mean,
you kind of have to know that these tricks are useful. Yeah.
Otherwise you're just picking your interpretation. You could say, oh,
it's learned tricks or it's hardwired.
Yeah. So, so I think the answer to that, for me,
it's completely unknown that they're just beginning to fly all these subjects
out. You know, do a couple of days worth of brain scans. I mean, this is a big,
big project. No one quite knows what they'll find.
I'm a,
I think it's highly likely to be like most things in life are turning out to be,
which is, yes, the wiring makes a difference and yes,
the experience makes a difference.
And the wiring and the experience are interacting and changing each other.
[inaudible] so jad um,
I have never been able to,
with hold my fierce desire to eat all the chicken when seven pieces of chicken
is served. Just the people. I will eat four pieces of chicken.
And yet somehow I have gone through most of my life holding the job,
doing quite well. So, you know, I think before people take mystery shows,
views too close to heart. Do you remember there are outliers.
There are people who have grabbed the marshmallow early and yet who have somehow
thrive. That's right. Anyhow,
Radiolab is funded by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
the corporation for public broadcasting and the National Science Foundation.
I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.